feat(ai-gateway): Update AI MCP server entity docs (#5786)
Kong/developer.konghq.com: app/_ai_gateway_entities/ai-mcp-server.md

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Sends the request to the upstream service.
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Per-tool ACLs](#schema-aigateway-mcpserver-tools-acls) override the MCP Server's [default tool ACLs](#schema-aigateway-mcpserver-default-tool-acls). For more information, see [ACL tool control](#acl-tool-control).
```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Server modes

The [`type`](#schema-aigateway-mcpserver-type) field selects one of five modes. Choose a mode based your use case and whether you're generating an MCP server from a REST API, connecting to an MCP server that already exists, or aggregating tools from multiple MCP Servers into a single endpoint.

<!-- vale off -->
{% table %}
columns:
  - title: Use case
    key: usecase
  - title: Integration pattern
    key: pattern
  - title: Description
    key: description
  - title: Mode
    key: mode
rows:
  - usecase: |
      You already operate an MCP server and want {{site.ai_gateway}} to act as an authenticated,
      observable entrypoint. Common for third-party or internally hosted MCP services exposed
      through {{site.ai_gateway}}.
    pattern: Existing MCP server
    description: |
      Listens for incoming MCP requests and proxies them to an upstream MCP server without
      converting tools. Generates MCP observability metrics.
    mode: "`passthrough-listener`"
  - usecase: |
      Make an existing REST API available to MCP clients directly through {{site.ai_gateway}}.
      Common for services that both define and handle their own tools.
    pattern: Generate from REST API
    description: |
      Converts RESTful API paths into MCP tools and accepts incoming MCP requests on the Route
      path. Tools are defined directly on the MCP Server and an optional server block applies.
      Supports session identifiers set by authentication services for cookie-based
      authentication.
    mode: "`conversion-listener`"
  - usecase: |
      Define reusable tool specifications without serving them yourself. Suitable for teams that
      maintain a shared library of tool definitions for one or more `listener` MCP Servers.
    pattern: Generate from REST API and feeds aggregate
    description: |
      Converts RESTful API paths into MCP tools but does not accept incoming MCP requests.
      Tools are tagged at the MCP Server level so a `listener` MCP Server can reference them.
    mode: "`conversion-only`"
  - usecase: |
      A single MCP endpoint that aggregates tools from multiple `conversion-only` or
      `upstream-server` MCP Servers. Typical in multi-service or multi-team environments that
      expose a unified MCP interface.
    pattern: Aggregate
    description: |
      Instead of defining its own tools, binds tools from one or more `conversion-only` or
      `upstream-server` MCP Servers through `config.server.tag`.
    mode: "`listener`"
  - usecase: |
      Expose an existing upstream MCP server's tools alongside others through a single `listener`
      endpoint. Adding a new upstream is just deploying a new `upstream-server` with matching
      tags.
    pattern: Existing MCP server and feeds aggregate
    description: |
      Registers a real MCP server into an aggregation pool. Dynamically fetches the upstream's
      tool list and caches it. Supports optional OAuth2 authentication to fetch tool lists from
      the upstream.
    mode: "`upstream-server`"
{% endtable %}
<!-- vale on -->
```
Reworked the table to focus on use case + pattern and then point users to the server type they need.

Also, flagging that I saw one "Route path", not sure if that's still accurate or should be reworded since services/routes are now abstracted.

Reviewer: Just a note, I'm seeing "Consumer" (not "AI Consumer") on a few unedited lines in here. Make sure those are updated.

Author: This was missed by me + the skill, I'm fixing all of those.

      `HTTP 403 Forbidden`. Earlier {{site.ai_gateway}} versions returned the JSON-RPC error code
      `INVALID_PARAMS -32602`; from {{site.ai_gateway}} 3.14 onward, denials follow the
      [MCP 2025-11-25 authorization specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/basic/authorization#error-handling).

  - q: Can I attach the same authentication or rate-limiting policy that I'd attach to the AI MCP Server?
    a: |
      Policy configuration that applies to the AI MCP Server goes through the
      [AI Policy entity](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-policy/). Attach Policies to the AI MCP Server through its
      [`policies`](#schema-aigateway-mcpserver-policies) field.
---

## What is an AI MCP Server?

Create an AI MCP Server to connect AI applications such as [Claude](https://claude.ai/), [Cursor](https://cursor.com/), or [Insomnia](/insomnia/) to your APIs and tools through the standardized [Model Context Protocol](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/). An AI MCP Server acts as a bridge between MCP-compatible clients and your backend systems, allowing you to expose existing APIs as discoverable tools without building custom integrations for each AI client.

> Because MCP endpoints run directly on {{site.ai_gateway}}, you don't need to host and scale MCP infrastructure separately. The same authentication, rate limiting, and observability you apply to traditional API traffic automatically covers MCP traffic, giving you consistent governance across both HTTP and MCP clients.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because MCP endpoints run directly on {{site.ai_gateway}}, you don't need to host and scale MCP infrastructure separately. The same authentication, rate limiting, and observability policies you apply to traditional API traffic automatically covers MCP traffic, giving you consistent governance across both HTTP and MCP clients.
```

{:.warning}

> > **Note:** MCP traffic is API-level traffic, not LLM request/response flows. The [AI MCP OAuth2 Policy](/ai-gateway/policies/ai-mcp-oauth2/) provides MCP-specific OAuth2 validation. Standard API-level policies (authentication, rate limiting, logging) apply to MCP traffic. AI Policies that operate on LLM prompt/response flows (such as prompt guards or model routing) won't apply here.

Reviewer 2: Is the distinction between lower case (generic?) and AI Policies throughout this page intentional?

## Manage AI MCP Servers

AI MCP Servers can be created and managed through the:

* {{site.konnect_short_name}} UI

> * {{site.ai_gateway}} API: `/v1/ai-gateways/{aiGatewayId}/mcp-servers`

Reviewer 2: Admin API?

      filter, for example `.user.email`). ACLs then evaluate against the claim value extracted from
      the OAuth access token instead of the resolved Consumer identity. The OAuth flow is supplied
      by the [AI MCP OAuth2 Policy](/ai-gateway/policies/ai-mcp-oauth2/).

  - q: What error code do denied requests return?
    a: |
      `HTTP 403 Forbidden`. Earlier {{site.ai_gateway}} versions returned the JSON-RPC error code
      `INVALID_PARAMS -32602`; from {{site.ai_gateway}} 3.14 onward, denials follow the
      [MCP 2025-11-25 authorization specification](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/specification/2025-11-25/basic/authorization#error-handling).

  - q: Can I attach the same authentication or rate-limiting policy that I'd attach to a Route?
    a: |
      Policy configuration that applies to the AI MCP Server goes through the
      [AI Policy entity](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-policy/). Attach Policies to the AI MCP Server through its
      [`policies`](#schema-aigateway-mcpserver-policies) field.
---

## What is an AI MCP Server?

> Create an AI MCP Server to connect AI applications such as [Claude](https://claude.ai/), [Cursor](https://cursor.com/), or [Insomnia](https://konghq.com/products/kong-insomnia) to your APIs and tools through the standardized [Model Context Protocol](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/). An AI MCP Server acts as a bridge between MCP-compatible clients and your backend systems, allowing you to expose existing APIs as discoverable tools without building custom integrations for each AI client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an AI MCP Server to connect AI applications such as [Claude](https://claude.ai/), [Cursor](https://cursor.com/), or [Insomnia](/insomnia/) to your APIs and tools through the standardized [Model Context Protocol](https://modelcontextprotocol.io/). An AI MCP Server acts as a bridge between MCP-compatible clients and your backend systems, allowing you to expose existing APIs as discoverable tools without building custom integrations for each AI client.
```

Because MCP endpoints run directly on {{site.ai_gateway}}, you don't need to host and scale MCP infrastructure separately. The same authentication, rate limiting, and observability you apply to traditional API traffic automatically covers MCP traffic, giving you consistent governance across both HTTP and MCP clients.

{:.warning}
> **Note:** AI MCP Servers handle MCP request flows, not LLM request flows. [AI Policies](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-policy/) attached to an AI MCP Server apply only to MCP traffic. Policies designed for LLM model requests won't apply here.

## Manage AI MCP Servers

> AI MCP Servers can be created and managed through:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AI MCP Servers can be created and managed through the:
```

* {{site.konnect_short_name}} UI
* {{site.ai_gateway}} API: `/v1/ai-gateways/{aiGatewayId}/mcp-servers`

> For configuration examples and step-by-step setup instructions, see [Set up an AI MCP Server](#set-up-an-ai-mcp-server) below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For configuration examples and step-by-step setup instructions, see [Set up an AI MCP Server](#set-up-an-ai-mcp-server).
```
Since the "below" "above" etc. can be confusing if an agent/AI chunks this.

> ## Use cases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## MCP server governance
```
"Use cases" felt like it was going to tell me why I should use AI MCP server for my MCP servers. The current content is good, I just want to reframe that this is telling users with AI MCP servers how they can govern it/apply policies.

> Attach [AI Policies](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-policy/) to your AI MCP Server for common governance scenarios:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attach [AI Policies](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-policy/) to your AI MCP Server to govern them:
```

> Attach [AI Policies](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-policy/) to your AI MCP Server for common governance scenarios:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Attach [AI Policies](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-policy/) to AI MCP Servers to enforce authentication, rate limits, request/response transformation, and OAuth gating. Add them to the [`policies`](#schema-aigateway-mcpserver-policies) field by name or ID. AI Policies run on all MCP traffic through the server, before tool invocation and after ACL checks. Multiple AI Policies can attach to one AI MCP Server, and each runs independently in the request lifecycle.

You can also attach AI Policies at the [AI Consumer](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-consumer/) level for per-client enforcement. 

Attach [AI Policies](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-policy/) to your AI MCP Server for common governance scenarios:
```

<!-- vale off -->
{% table %}
columns:
  - title: Use case
    key: use_case

>   - title: Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - title: Policy
```

    key: example
rows:

>   - use_case: "Authentication"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - use_case: "Secure MCP endpoints with credentials or OAuth tokens"
```
Wanted to reword this so it was more verbose to match the use case and then for the Example column, we can just link to the plugin/policy?

>     example: "Attach [AI Key Auth](/ai-gateway/policies/ai-key-auth/) or [AI OpenID Connect](/ai-gateway/policies/ai-openid-connect/) Policy to secure MCP endpoints with credentials or OAuth tokens."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    example: "[AI Key Auth](/ai-gateway/policies/ai-key-auth/reference/) or [AI OpenID Connect](/ai-gateway/policies/ai-openid-connect/reference/) Policy"
```

  - use_case: "Rate limiting"

>     example: "Use [AI Rate Limiting](/ai-gateway/policies/ai-rate-limiting/) or [AI Rate Limiting Advanced](/ai-gateway/policies/ai-rate-limiting-advanced/) Policy to control MCP request volume per AI Consumer or Consumer Group."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - use_case: "Control MCP request volume via rate limiting"
    example: "[AI Rate Limiting Advanced](/ai-gateway/policies/ai-rate-limiting-advanced/) Policy"
```
Regular Rate Limiting doesn't seem to exist (which feels expected since this is Konnect/enterprise only)

Author: AI plugins/policies, except for the Oauth one will not work with MCP Servers, since they operate on tokens. For MCP Server it's not LLM traffic, but API traffic. If you use the GET command for available policies, both Rate Limiting policies appear as available.

  - use_case: "Observability"

>     example: "Enable request and response logging through [AI Policies](/ai-gateway/policies/?category=logging) and audit trails to track all MCP traffic and ACL decisions."

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - use_case: "Track all MCP traffic and ACL decisions."
    example: "Enable request and response logging through [AI logging Policies](/ai-gateway/policies/?category=logging) and audit trails."
```

      endpoint. The listener aggregates all tagged upstreams, so adding a new upstream is just
      deploying a new `upstream-server` with matching tags.
{% endtable %}
## Server modes

The [`type`](#schema-aigateway-mcpserver-type) field selects one of five modes. Choose a mode based your use case and whether you're generating an MCP server from a REST API, connecting to an MCP server that already exists, or aggregating tools from multiple MCP Servers into a single endpoint.

<!-- vale off -->
{% table %}
columns:
  - title: Use case
    key: usecase
  - title: Integration pattern
    key: pattern
  - title: Description
    key: description
  - title: Mode
    key: mode
rows:
  - usecase: |
      You already operate an MCP server and want {{site.ai_gateway}} to act as an authenticated,
      observable entrypoint. Common for third-party or internally hosted MCP services exposed
      through {{site.ai_gateway}}.
    pattern: Existing MCP server
    description: |
      Listens for incoming MCP requests and proxies them to an upstream MCP server without

>       converting tools. Generates MCP observability metrics.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't all modes generate MCP observability metrics ? Consider removing this and adding a general reference to metrics with a link in the preceding paragraph.

Author: fixed

    mode: "`passthrough-listener`"
  - usecase: |
      Make an existing REST API available to MCP clients directly through {{site.ai_gateway}}.
      Common for services that both define and handle their own tools.
    pattern: Generate from REST API
    description: |

>       Converts RESTful API paths into MCP tools and accepts incoming MCP requests on the Route

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      Converts RESTful API paths into MCP tools and accepts incoming MCP requests on the route
```

Elsewhere you removed capitalisation on route since it is not an entity

      path. Tools are defined directly on the MCP Server and an optional server block applies.
      Supports session identifiers set by authentication services for cookie-based
      authentication.
    mode: "`conversion-listener`"
  - usecase: |
      Define reusable tool specifications without serving them yourself. Suitable for teams that
      maintain a shared library of tool definitions for one or more `listener` MCP Servers.
    pattern: Generate from REST API and feeds aggregate
    description: |
      Converts RESTful API paths into MCP tools but does not accept incoming MCP requests.
      Tools are tagged at the MCP Server level so a `listener` MCP Server can reference them.
    mode: "`conversion-only`"
  - usecase: |
      A single MCP endpoint that aggregates tools from multiple `conversion-only` or

>       `upstream-server` MCP Servers. Typical in multi-service or multi-team environments that

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      `upstream-server` MCP Servers. Typical used in multi-service or multi-team environments that
```

### Upstream authentication

By default, the AI MCP Server in `listener` mode connects to upstreams without credentials. If an upstream MCP server requires authentication:

- Set [`config.server.tools_list_auth`](#schema-aigateway-mcpserver-config-server-tools-list-auth) on the `upstream-server` type with OAuth2 client-credentials configuration

> - {{site.ai_gateway}} fetches a token from your identity provider when first needed, caches it, and refreshes it when it expires

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- {{site.ai_gateway}} fetches a token from your identity provider when it's needed, caches it, and refreshes it when it expires
```

## Sessions

Some MCP clients need to maintain state across multiple tool calls such as authentication tokens, conversation context, or request IDs. {{site.ai_gateway}} can manage session state for you in `listener` and `conversion-listener` modes, storing it either encrypted on the client or in Redis. Configure session storage through [`config.server.session`](#schema-aigateway-mcpserver-config-server-session). The `passthrough-listener` mode doesn't manage sessions because state lives entirely on the upstream MCP server.

> Two session strategies:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are two session strategies:
```

1. **Client.** Session state is encrypted into the MCP session ID assigned to the client. Requires `secrets` which are encryption keys; the first entry is used for encryption, all entries are used for decryption to support key rotation.
1. **Redis.** Session state is stored in Redis. Configure connection details and authentication in [`config.server.session.redis`](#schema-aigateway-mcpserver-config-server-session-redis).

{% include_cached /md/ai-gateway/v2/policies/redis-cloud-auth.md tier='enterprise' %}

Configure how long sessions persist using [`session_ttl`](#schema-aigateway-mcpserver-config-server-session-session-ttl) (default 24 hours) to match your application's needs. If your upstream server already manages state internally, disable {{site.ai_gateway}}'s session management by setting `managed: false`.

{:.info}
> Secrets used in session encryption can be referenced from an [AI Vault](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-vault/).

## ACL tool control

> When exposing MCP servers through {{site.ai_gateway}}, you may need granular control over which authenticated AI Consumers can discover and invoke specific tools. The MCP Server's ACL feature lets you define access rules at both the default level (applying to all tools) and per-tool level (for fine-grained exceptions).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When exposing MCP servers through {{site.ai_gateway}}, you may need granular control over which authenticated [AI Consumers](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-consumer/) can discover and invoke specific tools. The MCP Server's ACL feature lets you define access rules at both the default level (which applies to all tools) and per-tool level (for fine-grained exceptions).
```

> This way, AI Consumers only interact with tools appropriate to their role, while maintaining a complete audit trail of all access attempts. Authentication is handled by an authentication Policy attached to the MCP Server (such as [Key Auth Policy](/ai-gateway/policies/key-auth/) or an OIDC flow), and the resulting Consumer identity is used for ACL checks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This way, AI Consumers only interact with tools appropriate to their role, while maintaining a complete audit trail of all access attempts. Authentication is handled by an authentication Policy attached to the MCP Server (such as [Key Auth Policy](/ai-gateway/policies/key-auth/) or an [OpenID Connect Policy](/ai-gateway/policies/openid-connect/)), and the AI Consumer identity is used for ACL checks.
```

> To use ACLs with `listener` mode:
> 1. Configure `conversion-listener` or `conversion-only` AI MCP Servers with ACL rules and tags.
> 1. Configure `listener` mode to aggregate tools by matching tags.
> 1. Set [`include_consumer_groups`](#schema-aigateway-mcpserver-include-consumer-groups): true on the listener. Without this setting, the listener cannot pass AI Consumer Group membership to the aggregated tools, and ACL rules will not evaluate correctly.

### Attribute types

For modes that support ACL configuration (`conversion-listener`, `conversion-only`, `upstream-server`), two attribute types determine what the AI MCP Server evaluates ACL rules against:

> 1. **`consumer`** (default). Evaluates against the resolved Consumer identity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **`consumer`** (default). Evaluates against the resolved AI Consumer identity.
```

## Logging and audits

> To monitor and troubleshoot MCP traffic, enable logging and audit trails through [`config.logging`](#schema-aigateway-mcpserver-config-logging). You can capture per-request statistics for metrics, full request and response payloads for debugging, and [audit entries](/ai-gateway/ai-audit-log-reference/#ai-mcp-logs) for every ACL decision. Note that payload logging may expose sensitive data. Enable it only when debugging and be careful with retention. AI MCP Server analytics appear in [{{site.konnect_short_name}} Explorer and Dashboards](/ai-gateway/monitor-ai-llm-metrics/#mcp-traffic-metrics) alongside other {{site.ai_gateway}} traffic, and export through [OpenTelemetry](/ai-gateway/ai-otel-metrics/#mcp-metrics).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To monitor and troubleshoot MCP traffic, enable logging and audit trails through [`config.logging`](#schema-aigateway-mcpserver-config-logging). You can capture per-request statistics for metrics, full request and response payloads for debugging, and [audit entries](/ai-gateway/ai-audit-log-reference/#ai-mcp-logs) for every ACL decision. Note that payload logging may expose sensitive data. Enable it only when debugging and be careful with retention. [AI MCP Server analytics](/ai-gateway/monitor-ai-llm-metrics/#mcp-traffic-metrics) display in {{site.konnect_short_name}} [Explorer](https://cloud.konghq.com/analytics/explorer) and [Dashboards](https://cloud.konghq.com/analytics/dashboards) alongside other {{site.ai_gateway}} traffic, and export through [OpenTelemetry](/ai-gateway/policies/opentelemetry/reference/).
```
double check my OTEL link, I think that's where we'd want to send them

> ## Attach Policies

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
Moving, see comment below

Just like HTTP Routes, AI MCP Servers benefit from security and governance AI Policies. Attach [AI Policies](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-policy/) to enforce authentication, rate limits, request/response transformation, and OAuth gating. Add them to the [`policies`](#schema-aigateway-mcpserver-policies) field by name or ID. AI Policies run on all MCP traffic through the server, before tool invocation and after ACL checks. Multiple AI Policies can attach to one AI MCP Server, and each runs independently in the request lifecycle.

> You can also attach AI Policies at the [AI Consumer](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-consumer/) level for per-client enforcement. See [Use cases](#use-cases) for practical AI Policy combinations, and the [AI Policy entity](/ai-gateway/entities/ai-policy/) reference for all supported policy types and how they work.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
This is duplicating content from the Use cases section. I'm going to move the relevant bits there.

Author: I couldn't apply this suggestion, so I deleted this manually

## Set up an AI MCP Server

The following example creates a `conversion-listener` AI MCP Server that exposes the [WeatherAPI](https://www.weatherapi.com/) through a single `get-current-weather` MCP tool.

{:.info}

> > You need your WeatherAPI API key set as an environment variable (`DECK_WEATHERAPI_API_KEY`) before using this example.

Reviewer: Just flagging, not sure if we want to leave this for decK support later down the road, or if we should switch this and the entity_example to use `WEATHERAPI_API_KEY`

Author: decK will come in the future, I will delete this prefix for now
